Add guide on how to wrap a JAX function in a Aesara Op (#302)
pymc-devs/pymc-examples: myst_nbs/case_studies/wrapping_jax_function.myst.md

---
jupytext:
  text_representation:
    extension: .md
    format_name: myst
    format_version: 0.13
    jupytext_version: 1.13.7
kernelspec:
  display_name: pymc-examples
  language: python

>   name: pymc-examples

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  name: pymc-examples
substitutions:
  extra_dependencies: jax numpyro
```

substitutions metadata was missing from the myst

Author: I guess it doesn't get copied automatically? Or did I forget something

]

az.plot_posterior(idata, ref_val=true_values, grid=(3, 5));
```

The posteriors look reasonably centered around the true values used to generate our data.

+++

## Unwrapping the wrapped JAX function

+++

As mentioned in the beginning, Aesara can compile an entire graph to JAX. To do this, it needs to know how each {class}`~aesara.graph.op.Op` in the graph can be converted to a JAX function. This can be done by {term}`dispatch <dispatching>` with {func}`aesara.link.jax.dispatch.jax_funcify`. Most of the default Aesara {class}`~aesara.graph.op.Op`s already have such a dispatch function, but we will need to add a new one for our custom `HMMLogpOp`, as Aesara has never seen that before.

For that we need a function which returns (another) JAX function, that performs the same computation as in our `perform` method. Fortunately, we started exactly with such function, so this amounts to 3 short lines of code.

```{code-cell} ipython3
@jax_funcify.register(HMMLogpOp)
def hmm_logp_dispatch(op, **kwargs):
    return vec_hmm_logp
```

:::{note}
We do not return the jitted function, so that the entire Aesara graph can be jitted together after being converted to JAX.
:::

> For a better understanding of {class}`~aesara.graph.op.Op` JAX conversions, we recommend reading Aesara's [Adding JAX and Numba support for Ops guide](https://aesara.readthedocs.io/en/latest/extending/creating_a_numba_jax_op.html?highlight=JAX)

Reviewer: the link to the aesara guide should be `` {doc}`aesara:extending/creating_a_numba_jax_op` `` (it has no target so the doc way must be used)

Author: Thanks, updated

Author: Should I use something like this this for the first reference to Aesara as well? I did `[Aesara](https://aesara.readthedocs.io/en/latest/) `

Reviewer: better to do it, then we can add a check against urls containing `aesara.readthedocs.io` more easily (like we did on pymc versioned docs). Link to the home page is `` {doc}`Aesara <aesara:index>` ``.

Author: Done

```{code-cell} ipython3
out = hmm_logp_op(
    emission_observed,
    emission_signal_true,
    emission_noise_true,
    logp_initial_state_true,
    logp_transition_true,
)
jax_fn = aesara.function(inputs=[], outputs=out, mode="JAX")
jax_fn()
```

We can also compile a JAX function that computes the log probability of each variable in our PyMC model, similar to {meth}`~pymc.Model.point_logps`. We will use the helper method {meth}`~pymc.Model.compile_fn`.

```{code-cell} ipython3
model_logp_jax_fn = model.compile_fn(model.logpt(sum=False), mode="JAX")
model_logp_jax_fn(initial_point)
```

Note that we could have added an equally simple function to convert our `HMMLogpGradOp`, in case we wanted to convert Aesara gradient graphs to JAX. In our case, we don't need to do this because we will rely on JAX `grad` function (or more precisely, NumPyro will rely on it) to obtain these again from our compiled JAX function.

We include a {ref}`short discussion <aesara_vs_jax>` at the end of this document, to help you better understand the trade-offs between working with Aesara graphs vs JAX functions, and when you might want to use one or the other.

+++

### Sampling with NumPyro

+++

> Now that we know our model logp can be entirely compiled to JAX, we can use the handy {mod}`pymc.sampling_jax` module to sample our model using the pure JAX sampler implemented in NumPyro.

Reviewer: `pymc.sampling_jax` is not documented as a module, instead its functions are integrated in the sampling section with the "regular" ones: https://docs.pymc.io/en/latest/api/samplers.html#samplers. Should it be documented as a module?

Author: Probably not, but we should add a note saying that the module has to be imported to be able to call those functions

Author: Opened an issue here: https://github.com/pymc-devs/pymc/issues/5710

Depending on the model and computer architecture you are using, a pure JAX sampler can provide considerable speedups.

+++

(aesara_vs_jax)=
## Some brief notes on using Aesara vs JAX

+++

### When should you use JAX?

+++

As we have seen, it is pretty straightforward to interface between Aesara graphs and JAX functions. 

This can be very handy when you want to combine previously implemented JAX function with PyMC models. We used a marginalized HMM log-likelihood in this example, but the same strategy could be used to do Bayesian inference with Deep Neural Networks or Differential Equations, or pretty much any other functions implemented in JAX that can be used in the context of a Bayesian model.

It can also be worth it, if you need to make use of JAX's unique features like vectorization, support for tree structures, or its fine-grained parallelization, and GPU and TPU capabilities.

+++

### When should you not use JAX?

+++

Like JAX, Aesara has the goal of mimicking the NumPy and Scipy APIs, so that writing code in Aesara should feel very similar to how code is written in those libraries.

There are, however, some of advantages to working with Aesara:

> 1. Aesara graphs are considerably easier to [inspect and debug](https://aesara.readthedocs.io/en/latest/tutorial/debug_faq.html) than JAX functions

Reviewer: The link should be `` {ref}`inspect and debug <aesara:debug_faq>` ``. This one has a [target defined](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/aesara-devs/aesara/main/doc/tutorial/debug_faq.rst). 

Similar comments for the two below, I can help if needed.

Author: How do I find out which pages have "targets defined" and what those should be?

Reviewer: In rST they are the `.. _target_id:` in MyST they are the `(target_id)=`. They generally come right before titles and point to that title but could also point to specific items in a bullet point or numbered list. 

Note that the target is `target_id` in both, the preceding underscore in rST is not part of the target but of the syntax.

+++

## Sampling with Numpyro

+++

Now that we know our model logp can be entirely compiled to JAX, we can use the handy {mod}`pymc.sampling_jax` module to sample our model using the pure JAX sampler implemented in NumPyro.

```{code-cell} ipython3
with model:
    idata_numpyro = pm.sampling_jax.sample_numpyro_nuts(chains=2)
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
az.plot_trace(idata_numpyro);
```

```{code-cell} ipython3
az.plot_posterior(idata_numpyro, ref_val=true_values);
```

As expected, sampling results look pretty similar! 

Depending on the model and computer architecture you are using, a pure JAX sampler can provide considerable speedups.

+++

## Bonus: Using a single Op to wrap the value and gradients at once

+++

We had to create two {class}`~aesara.graph.basic.Op`s, one for the function we cared about and a separate one for its gradients. However, JAX provides a `value_and_grad` utility that can return both the value of a function and its derivatives. This means we can get away with a single {class}`~aesara.graph.basic.Op` if we are clever about it.

> It also means we can (potentially) save memory and reuse computation that is shared between the function and its gradients. This may be relevant when working with very large JAX functions.

Author: ```suggestion
Doing this can (potentially) save memory and reuse computation that is shared between the function and its gradients. This may be relevant when working with very large JAX functions.
```

        )

        return [output_gradients[0] * grad for grad in gradients]

hmm_logp_value_grad_op = HmmLogpValueGradOp()
```

We check again that we can take the gradient using Aesara `grad` interface

```{code-cell} ipython3
emission_signal_variable = at.as_tensor_variable(emission_signal_true)
# Only the first output is assigned to the variable `x`, due to `default_output=0`
x = hmm_logp_value_grad_op(
    emission_observed,
    emission_signal_variable,
    emission_noise_true,
    logp_initial_state_true,
    logp_transition_true,
)
at.grad(x, emission_signal_variable).eval()
```

(aesara_vs_jax)=
## Notes on using Aesara vs JAX

+++

### When should you write functions in JAX?

+++

As we have seen, it is pretty straightforward to interface between Aesara graphs and JAX functions. 

This can be very handy when you want to combine previously implemented JAX function with PyMC models. We used a marginalized HMM log-likelihood in this example, but the same strategy could be used to do Bayesian inference with Deep Neural Networks or Differential Equations, or pretty much any other functions implemented in JAX that can be used in the context of a Bayesian model.

> It can also be important, if you need to make use of JAX's unique features like vectorization, support for tree structures, or make use of its fine-grained parallelization, or GPU and TPU capabilities.

Author: ```suggestion
It can also be worth it, if you need to make use of JAX's unique features like vectorization, support for tree structures, or its fine-grained parallelization, and GPU and TPU capabilities.
```
